one and the lecture on symmetric
matrices so that's the most important
class of matrices symmetric matrices a
equals a transpose so the first points
the main points of the lecture I'll tell
you right away what's special about the
eigenvalues what's special about the
eigenvectors this is now that this is
the way we now look at a matrix we want
to know about its eigenvalues and
eigenvectors and if we have a special
type of matrix that should tell us
something about eigenvalues and
eigenvectors like markov matrices they
have an eigenvalue equal 1 now symmetric
matrices can I just tell you right off
what the main facts the two main facts
are the eigenvalues of a symmetric
matrix real this is a real symmetric
matrix we're talking mostly about real
matrices the eigen values are also real
so our examples of rotation matrices
where where we got I can values that
were complex that won't happen now for a
symmetric matrices the eigen values are
real and the eigen vectors are also very
special the eigen vectors are
perpendicular orthogonal so which do you
prefer I'll say perpendicular perp well
they're both long words perp and dick
okay right so I you should say why and
I'll at least answer why for case one
maybe case to the checking the eigen
that the eigen vectors are perpendicular
I'll leave to the book but let's just
realize what well first I have to say it
it could happen like for the identity
matrix there's a symmetric matrix its
eigenvalues are certainly all real
they're all one for the identity matrix
what about the eigenvectors well for the
identity every vector is an eigenvector
so how can i say they're perpendicular
what I really mean is the this word are
should really be written can be chosen
perpendicular that is if we have it's
the usual case if the eigenvalues are
all different then each eigenvalue as
one line of eigenvectors and those lines
are perpendicular here but if an
eigenvalue is repeated then there's a
whole plane of eigenvectors and all I'm
saying is that in that plane we can
choose perpendicular ones so that's why
it's a can be chosen part if this is in
the case of a repeated eigenvalue where
there's some real substantial freedom
but the typical case is different
eigenvalues all real one-dimensional
eigen vector spaces eigenspaces and all
perpendicular so just let's just see the
conclusion if we accept those as correct
what happens and i also mean that
there's a full set of them i
so that's part of this picture here that
there's a complete set of eigenvectors
perpendicular ones so having a complete
set of eigenvectors means so normal so
the usual maybe I put the usually usual
usual case is that the matrix a we can
write in terms of its eigen value matrix
and its eigenvector matrix this way
right we can do that in the usual case
but now what's special when the matrix
is symmetric so this is the usual case
and now let me go to the symmetric case
so in the symmetric case a this this
should become somehow a little special
well the lambdas on the diagonal are
still on the diagonal there they're real
but that's where they are what about the
eigenvector matrix so what can I do now
special about the eigenvector matrix
when when the a itself is symmetric that
says something good about the
eigenvector matrix so what is this what
does this lead to this these
perpendicular eigenvectors I can only I
can not only guarantee they're
perpendicular I could also make them
unit vectors no problem just scale their
lengths to one so what do I have I have
orthonormal eigenvectors and what does
that tell me about the eigenvector
matrix what what letter should I now use
in place of s remember s has the
eigenvectors in its columns but now
those columns are orthonormal so the
right letter to use is q so that's where
so we've got the letter all set up so
this should
Q lambda Q inverse Q standing in our
minds always for this matrix in this
case its square its its so these are the
columns of Q of course and one more
thing what's Q inverse for an
orthonormal for a matrix that has these
orthonormal columns we know that the
inverse is the same as the transpose so
here is the beautiful there's the the
great description the factorization of a
symmetric matrix and this is like one of
the famous theorems of linear algebra
that if I have a symmetric matrix it can
be factored in this form an orthogonal
matrix times diagonal times the
transpose of that orthogonal matrix and
of course everybody immediately says yes
and if this is possible then that's
clearly symmetric right that take we've
looked at products of three guys like
that and taken their transpose and we
got it back again so do you see the
beauty of this of this factorization
then it completely displays the
eigenvalues and eigenvectors and the
symmetry of the of the whole thing
because that product q times lambda
times q transpose if I transpose it it
just comes in this position and we get
that matrix back again so that's in
mathematics that's called the spectral
theorem spectrum is the set of
eigenvalues of a matrix spec
it somehow comes from the idea of the
spectrum of light as a combination of
pure things where our matrix is broken
down into pure eigenvalues and
eigenvectors
in mechanic's it's often called the
principal axis theorem it's very useful
it means that if you have we'll see it
geometrically it means that if I have
some material if I look at the right
axes it becomes diagonal it becomes the
the directions don't couple together
okay so that's that's what to remember
from this lecture now I would like to
say why are the eigenvalues real can I
do that
so because something useful comes out so
I'll just come back come to that
question why real eigenvalues okay so I
have to start from the only thing we
know ax equal lambda X okay but as far
as I know at this moment lambda could be
complex I'm going to prove it's not and
X could be complex in fact for the
moment even a could be we could even
think well what happens if a is complex
well one thing we can always do this is
this is like always always okay I can if
I have an equation I can take the
complex conjugate of everything that's
no so a conjugate X conjugate equal
lambda conjugate X conjugate it just
means that everywhere over here that
there was a an I then here I changed it
to a minus I that that you know that
that step that conjugate business that a
plus IB if I conjugated it's a minus IB
that's the meaning of conjugate and
products behave right I can conjugate
every factor so I haven't done anything
yet except to say what
would be true if X in any case even if X
and lambda were complex of course our
and we're speaking about real matrices a
so I can take that out actually this
already tells me something about real
matrices I haven't used any assumption
of a equal a transpose yet symmetry is
waiting in the wings to be used this
tells me that if a real matrix has an
eigenvalue lambda and an eigenvector x
it also has another of its eigenvalues
is lambda bar with eigenvector x bar
real matrices the eigen values come in
lambda lambda bar the complex
eigenvalues come in lambda and lambda
bar pairs but of course I'm aiming to
show that they're not complex at all
here by getting symmetry in so how am I
going to use symmetry I'm going to
transpose this equation to X bar
transpose a transpose equals X bar
transpose lambda bar that's just a
number so I don't mind where I put that
number this is this is then again okay
but now I'm ready to use symmetry I'm
ready so this was all just mechanics now
now comes the moment to say okay if the
matrix is symmetric then this a
transpose is the same as a you see at
that moment I use the assumption now let
me finish the discussion here's the way
I finish I look at this original
equation and I take the inner product I
multiply both sides by oh maybe I'll do
it with this one I take I multiply both
sides by X bar transpose X bar transpose
a
spar equals lambda bar X bar transpose X
bar okay fine all right now what's the
other one oh the other one I'll probably
use this guy am i happy about this no
for some reason I'm not I'm I want to
yeah if I take the inner product of this
from the right with X bar I get X bar
transpose a X bar equals x bar transpose
lambda bar X bar I've done something
dumb because I've got the I haven't
learned anything I've got those two
equations are identical so forgive me
for doing such a thing
but a look at the book okay so I took
the dot product yeah somehow it didn't I
should have taken the dot product of
this guy here with that's what I was
gonna do a x equals lambda X bar
transpose X right okay so that that was
that's fine that comes directly from
that multiplying both sides by X bar
transpose but now I'd like to get why do
I have X bars over there oh yes forget
this okay on this one right on this one
I took it like that I multiply on the
right by X that's the idea okay now why
am i happier with this situation now the
proof is coming here because I compare
this guy
with this one and they have the same
left-hand side so they have the same
right-hand side so comparing those two
can I'll raise the board to do this
comparison this thing lambda X bar
transpose X is equal to lambda bar X bar
transpose X okay and the conclusion I'm
going to reach am I am I on the right
track here the conclusion I'm going to
reach is lambda equal lambda bar I would
have to track down the other possibility
that this this thing is zero but let me
oh oh yeah that's important it's not
zero so once I know that this isn't zero
I just cancel it and I learned that
lambda equals lambda bar and so what can
you do have you got the reasoning
altogether what does this tell us
lambda is an eigenvalue of this
symmetric matrix we've just proved that
an equaled lambda bar so we have just
proved that lambda is real right if if a
number is equal to its own complex
conjugate then there's no imaginary part
at all the number is real so lambda is
real good good
now what but it depended on this little
expression on knowing that that wasn't
zero so that I could cancel it out so
can we just take a second on that one
because it's an important quantity X bar
transpose X okay now remember as far as
we know X is complex so this is
here X is complex X has these components
X 1 X 2 down 2 X n and X bar transpose
well it's transposed and it's conjugated
so that's X 1 conjugated X 2 conjugated
up to X and conjugate it I'm really
reminding you of crucial facts about
complex numbers that are going to come
into the next lecture as well as this
one so what can you tell me about that
product I guess what I'm trying to say
is if I had a complex vector this would
be the quantity I would I would like
this is the quantity I like I would take
the vector times its transpose now what
what happens usually if I take a vector
X transpose X I mean that's a quantity
we see all the time X transpose X that's
the length of x squared right
that's this positive length squared it's
Pythagoras it's x1 squared plus x2
squared and so on
now our vectors complex and you see the
effect
I'm conjugating one of these guys so now
when I do this multiplication
I have x1 bar times x1 and x2 bar times
x2 and so on so this is an this is some
a plus IB and this is some a minus IB I
mean what's the point here
what's the point when I multiply a
number by its conjugate a complex number
by its conjugate what do I get I get up
the the imaginary part is gone when I
multiply a plus IB by its conjugate
what's what's the result of that of each
of those separate little multiplications
there's an a squared and and what how
many what's B squared it comes in with a
plus or a minus a plus
I times minus I is a plus B squared and
what about the imaginary part gone right
and I a B and a minus I a B so this this
is the right thing to do if you want a
decent answer then multiply numbers by
their conjugates multiply vectors by the
conjugates of X transpose so this
quantity is positive this quantity is
positive the whole thing is positive
except for the zero vector and that
allows me to know that this is a
positive number which I safely cancel
out and I reach the conclusion so
actually in this discussion here I've
done two things I've reached the
conclusion that lambdas real which I
wanted to do but at the same time we
sort of saw what to do if things were
complex if a vector is complex then it's
X bar transpose X this is its length
squared and as I said the next lecture
Monday will will repeat that this is the
right thing and then do the right thing
for matrices and all other all other
complex possibilities okay but the main
point then is that the eigenvalues of a
symmetric matrix it just where did we
use symmetry by the way we use it here
right
can I just suppose a was a complex
suppose I had been a complex number
could could I have made all this work if
a was a complex number but complex
matrix then here I should have written a
bar I erased the bar because I assumed a
was real but now let's
suppose for a moment it's not then when
I took this step what should I have what
did i do on that step I transposed so I
should have a bar transpose in the
symmetric case that was a and that's
what made everything work right this
this led immediately to that this one
that immediately to this when the matrix
was real so that didn't matter
and it was symmetric so that didn't
matter then I got a but so now I just
get to ask you suppose the matrix had
been complex what's the right equivalent
of symmetry so so so the good matrix so
here let me say good matrices by good I
mean real lambdas and perpendicular X's
and tell me now which matrices are good
if they're submit if they're if they're
real matrices the good ones are
symmetric because then everything went
through so the so the good the I'm
saying now what's good this is this is
these are the good matrices they have
real eigenvalues perpendicular
eigenvectors good means a equal a
transpose if real then then that was
what our proof worked but if a is
complex all our proof will still work
provided a bar transpose is a do you see
that I'm saying
I'm saying if we have complex matrices
and we want to say are they are they as
good as symmetric matrices then we
should not only transpose the thing but
conjugate it
those are good matrices and of course
the most
importance the most important case is
when they're real this part doesn't
matter and I just have a equal a
transpose symmetric I'll just repeat
that the good matrices if complex are
these if real that doesn't make any
difference so I'm just saying symmetric
and of course 99% of examples and
applications the matrices are real and
we don't have that and then symmetric is
the key property ok so that that's these
main facts and now let me just let me
just so that's this X bar transpose X ok
so I'll just write it once more in this
form so perpendicular orthonormal
eigenvectors real eigenvalues transposes
of orthonormal eigenvectors
that's the symmetric case a equal a
transpose oh good
actually I'll even take one more step
here suppose I can break this down to
show you really what that says about a
symmetric matrix I can break that down
let me here go these eigenvectors i here
go these eigenvalues lambda 1 lambda 2
and so on here go these eigenvectors
transposed and what happens if i
actually do out that multiplication do
you see what will happen
there's lambda 1 times q1 transpose so
the first row here is just lambda 1 Q 1
transpose if I multiply column times row
you remember I could do
that when I multiply matrices I can
multiply columns times rows so what I do
that I get lambda 1 and then the column
and then the row and then lambda 2 and
the column and the row every symmetric
matrix breaks up into these pieces so
these pieces have real lambdas and they
have these eigen these orthonormal
eigenvectors and maybe you even could
tell me what kind of a matrix have I got
there suppose I take a unit vector times
its transpose so column times row I'm
getting a matrix that's a matrix with a
special old name what's its what kind of
a matrix is it we've seen those matrices
now in Chapter four it's is a a
transpose with a unit vector so I don't
have to divide by a transpose a that
matrix is a projection matrix that's a
projection matrix it's symmetric and if
I square it there'll be another there be
a q1 transpose Q 1 which is 1 so I'll
get that matrix back again every so
every symmetric matrix every symmetric
matrix is a combination of mutually
perpendicular so perpendicular
projection matrices projection matrices
ok that's another way that people like
to think of the spectral theorem that
every symmetric matrix can be
broken up that way that I guess at this
moment first I haven't done an example I
could create a symmetric matrix check
that it's a find its eigenvalues they
would come out real find its
eigenvectors they would come out
perpendicular and you would see it in
numbers but maybe I'll leave it here for
the moment in letters oh maybe I will do
it with numbers for this reason because
there's one more remarkable fact can I
just put this further great fact about
symmetric matrices on the board when I
have symmetric matrices I know their
eigenvalues are real so then I can get
interested in the question are they
positive or negative and you remember
why that's important for differential
equations that decides between
instability and stability so I'm after I
know they're real then the next question
is are they positive are they negative
and I hate to have to compute those
eigenvalues to answer that question
right because computing the eigenvalues
of a symmetric matrix of order let's say
50 compute its 50 eigenvalues is a job I
mean by pencil and paper it's a
lifetime's job I mean which and in fact
a few years ago well say 20 years ago or
30 nobody really knew how to do it I
mean so like science was stuck on this
problem if you have a matrix of order 50
or 100 how do you find its eigenvalues
numerically now I'm just saying because
pencil and paper is we're going to run
out of time or paper or something before
we get it well and you might think okay
get the get get MATLAB
to compute the determinant of lambda
minus a a a minus lambda I this
polynomial of 50th degree and then find
the roots MATLAB will do it but it will
complain because it's a very bad way to
find the eigenvalues I'm sorry to be
saying this because it's the way I
taught you to do it right I taught you
to find the eigenvalues by doing that
determinant and taking the roots of that
polynomial but now I'm saying okay I
really meant that for two by twos and
three by threes but I didn't mean you to
do it on a 50 by 50 and you're not too
unhappy probably because you didn't want
to do it but good because it would be
very unstable way the aunt the 50
answers that would come out would be
highly unreliable so new ways are are
much better to find those 50 eigenvalues
that's a that's a part of numerical
linear algebra but here's the remarkable
fact that MATLAB would quite happily
find the 50 pivots right now the pivots
are not the same as the eigenvalues but
here's the great thing if if I had a
real matrix I could find those 50 pivots
and I could see maybe 28 of them are
positive and 22 or negative pivots and I
can compute those safely and quickly and
the great fact is that 28 of the
eigenvalues would be positive and 22
would be negative that the signs of the
pivots so this is like just I hope you
think this this is kind of a nice thing
that the signs of the pivots for
symmetric I'm always talking about
symmetric matrices so I really like
trying to convince you that symmetric
matrices are better than the rest so the
signs of the pivots are same as
the signs of the eigenvalues the same
number the number of pivots greater than
zero
the number of positive pivots is equal
to the number of positive eigenvalues so
that actually is a very useful that
gives you a good start on a decent way
to compute eigenvalues because you can
narrow them down you can find out how
many are positive how many are negative
then you could shift the matrix by seven
times the identity that would shift all
the eigenvalues by seven then you could
take the pivots of that matrix and you
would know how many eigen values of the
original were above seven and below
seven so this this neat little theorem
that the symmetric matrices have this
connection between nobody's mixing up in
thinking the pivots are the eigenvalues
I mean the only thing I can think of is
the product of the pivots equals the
product of the eigenvalues why is that
so if I asked you for the reason on that
why is the product of the pivots for a
symmetric matrix the same as the product
of the eigenvalues because they both
equal the determinant right the product
of the pivots gives the determinant if
no row exchanges the product of the
eigenvalues always gives the determinant
so so that products but that doesn't
tell you anything about the 50
individual ones which this does okay so
that's those are essential facts about
symmetric matrices okay now I said in
the in the lecture description that I
would take the last minute
to start on positive definite matrices
because we're right there where we're
we're ready to say what's a positive
definite matrix it's symmetric first of
all I always I will mean symmetric so
this is the this is the next section of
the book it's about this if symmetric
matrices are good which is like the
point of my lecture so far then positive
definite matrices are a subclass that
are excellent ok just the greatest oh so
what are they they're matrices they're
symmetric matrices so all their
eigenvalues are real you can guess what
they are these are symmetric matrices
with all the eigenvalues are ok tell me
what to write what well it it's hinted
of course by the name for these things
all the eigenvalues are positive ok tell
me about the pivots we can check the
eigenvalues or we can check the pivots
all the pivots are what and then I'll
then I'll finally give an example I feel
awful that I have got to this point in
the lecture and I haven't given you a
single example so let me give you 1 5 3
2 2 at symmetric fine its eigenvalues
are real for sure but more than that
I know the signs of those eigenvalues
and also I know the signs of those
pivots so what's the deal with the
pivots yeah if the eigenvalues are all
positive and if this little fact is true
that the pivots and eigenvalues have the
same signs then this must be true all
the pivots are positive and that's the
good way to test this is the good test
because I could what are the pivots for
that matrix the pivots for that matrix
are five so pivots are five and what's
the second pivot have we like notice the
formula for the second pivot in a matrix
it doesn't necessarily you know it may
come out of fraction for sure but what
is that fraction can you tell me well
here the product of the pivots is the
determinant what's the determinant of
this matrix eleven so the second pivot
must be eleven over five so that the
product is eleven they're both positive
then I know that the eigenvalues of that
matrix are both positive what are the
eigenvalues well I've got to take the
roots of you know do I put in a minus
lambda you mentally do this lambda
squared
- how many lambdas eight right five and
three the trace comes in there plus what
number comes here they determinant the
eleven so I set that to zero so the
eigenvalues are let's see half of that
is four look at that positive number
plus or minus the square root of 16
minus eleven I think five the
eigenvalues well
- by - they're not so terrible but
they're not so
perfect pivots are really simple and
this is this is the family of matrices
that you really want in differential
equations because you know the signs of
the eigenvalues so you know the
stability or not okay there's one other
related fact I can pop in here and in
the time available for positive definite
matrices the the related fact is to ask
you about determinants so what's the
determinant what can you tell me if I
remember positive definite means all
eigenvalues are positive all pivots are
positive so what can you tell me about
the determinant it's positive too but
somehow that that's not quite enough
here's a matrix minus 1 minus 3 what's
the determinant of that guy it's
positive right is this a positive
definite matrix are the pivots what are
the pivots well negative what are the
eigenvalues well they're also the same
so somehow I don't just want the
determinant of the whole matrix here is
11 that's great
here the determinate of the whole matrix
is 3 that's positive I also I've got to
check like little sub determinants say
maybe coming down from the left so the 1
by 1 and the 2 by 2 have to be positive
so there that's where I get the all all
can I call them sub determinants or see
I have to I need to make the thing
plural I need to test end things not
just the big determine
all sub determinants are positive then
I'm okay then I'm okay this passes the
test five is positive and eleven is
positive this fails the test because
that minus one there is negative and
then the big determinant is positive
three so this these this fact you see
that actually the course like coming
together and that's really my point now
in the next in this lecture and
particularly next Wednesday and Friday
the course comes together these pivots
that we met in the first week these
determinants that we met in the middle
of the course these eigenvalues that we
met most recently all matrices are
square here so coming together for
square matrices means these three pieces
come together and they come together in
that beautiful fact that if that all
that if I have one of these I have the
others that if I have but for symmetric
matrices so that this will be the
positive definite section and then the
real climax of the course is to make
everything come together for M by n
matrices not necessarily symmetric bring
bring everything together there and that
will be the final thing ok so have a
great weekend and don't forget symmetric
matrices Thanks